Architecture Feedback
=====================

Project: clean-reactive-architecture-react-nextjs
Reviewed against: documentation/docs/architecture.md, documentation/docs/methodology.md
Date: 2026-07-26

TLDR: The architecture is coherent and this repo demonstrates its strongest
claims convincingly. All three items originally raised are now closed: the
LSP/transaction bug (item 1) and the client-side DIP gap (item 3) were fixed
in code and verified by measurement; the third (toast handling, item 2)
turned out on review to be architecturally sound, with only a minor boundary
cost noted. What remains is the structural trade-offs section, which is
commentary rather than defects.


WHAT GENUINELY WORKS
--------------------

- One core, three real drivers. The bff / api / e2e adapter sets against the
  same generic use cases are the best evidence in the repo that the
  architecture delivers what it promises. The test harness as a first-class
  driver (not a fixture) is the standout idea.

- Interfaces extracted from consumers, everywhere. `*.types.ts` beside the UI
  that owns them, ports defined in src/application and implemented outward —
  the DIP is structural, not aspirational. The typed DI container plus
  TestBed.override() makes the seams cheap to use.

- Reducers as application business entities. The view -> bulk -> updating
  machine rejecting invalid transitions inside the reducer is exactly the
  "state with validity rules" concept from the docs, realized cleanly.


WHERE THE CODE CONTRADICTS ITS OWN ARCHITECTURE
-----------------------------------------------

1. Substituting the gateway changes observable behavior — the LSP claim
   breaks where it matters most.

   In bulkUpdateUseCase (src/application/use-cases/todos/bulk-update.use-case.ts,
   ~line 98), a failed toggle is caught inside the transaction callback,
   logged, and answered with mainTx.rollback(); `toggled` stays undefined and
   the function falls through to presenter(toggledTodos ?? []). The outcome
   depends on the backend (both verified):

   - sqlite: Drizzle's tx.rollback() throws, the outer catch wraps it as
     UnknownError, the user sees "unexpected error".
   - in-file: rollback is a literal no-op (() => {}), so nothing throws,
     deletes still execute, already-applied toggles stay persisted, and the
     presenter returns SUCCESS — the user sees "Bulk update completed!" for a
     partially failed, partially persisted operation.

   Two implementations of ITransactionManagerService produce different
   user-visible outcomes for the same input. It also means the `not_found`
   branch in the BFF presenter and the client's toast map is dead code for
   the toggle path — a NotFoundError from a toggle can never reach it.

   Recommended fix: let the error propagate out of the transaction callback
   and map it in the outer catch. This is the one item that is a bug rather
   than a design choice.

   RESOLVED 2026-07-26 (commits f1f79ce, 3335d1b, e241e56).

   Measured the same way before and after - same input (toggle a todo that
   does not exist), same use case, only the injected
   ITransactionManagerService swapped:

                before                                  after
     in-file    {"status":"success"}                    {"status":"failure","code":"not_found"}
     sqlite     {"status":"failure",                    {"status":"failure","code":"not_found"}
                 "code":"unexpected_error"}

   What changed:

   - Root cause removed. ITransaction no longer declares rollback(); it is
     `unknown`. The capability was never portable - a real driver aborts by
     throwing a control-flow error, a file-backed store could not abort at
     all - so any use case calling it behaved differently per implementation.
     A transaction is now rolled back by throwing out of the startTransaction
     callback. `unknown` also means a use case can pass the handle back to a
     repository and do nothing else with it, so the misuse cannot reappear;
     each backend names its own concrete type (SqliteTransaction,
     InFileTransaction).

   - bulk-update is now all or nothing: the toggles and the deletes share one
     transaction, so a failure anywhere reverts the whole request and the
     domain error reaches the outer catch. UnauthorizedError was added to that
     mapping - BulkUpdateOutputData already declared it, but the catch omitted
     it, so it was rewritten as UnknownError and the API presenter's 403
     branch was unreachable.

   - create-todo carried the identical defect (catch -> tx.rollback() ->
     presenter(todos ?? [])) and was fixed the same way. Switching ITransaction
     to `unknown` is what surfaced it: it was the last place still calling
     rollback(), and the compiler flagged it.

   - The in-file backend gained a real transaction. It snapshots its backing
     JSON files before running the callback and restores them if it throws, so
     it now honours the same all-or-nothing contract rather than silently
     keeping partial writes.

   - The `not_found` branch in the BFF presenter and the client toast map is
     no longer dead code - it is what the failing case actually returns.

   Coverage that did not exist before: bulk-update had no unit test at all
   (8 cases now), create-todo's test had encoded the buggy behaviour and now
   asserts the failure is reported, the in-file transaction manager has its
   own tests, and the API e2e test declares the all-or-nothing contract
   directly. Both e2e targets are green (62/62 each).

   Known limitation, documented at the implementation: the in-file rollback is
   whole-file, so it also reverts anything else written to those files during
   the callback, and it is not concurrency-safe. That is acceptable for the
   single-process dev/test store this backend exists for.

2. Toast notifications: an entity held by a library, with a projection cost
   at the call site. (Revised — originally reported as a violation; it is
   not.)

   Initial reading: controllers calling toast.error() put presentation output
   on the input path. That reading was wrong under the architecture's own
   definitions. Sonner's toast() writes to an external store that the
   <Toaster /> UI unit observes — so the runtime shape is controller ->
   transition on a notification entity -> UI observes. Unidirectional flow is
   preserved; the controller never touches the UI. The sonner store qualifies
   as an application business entity per the docs (state with its own
   validity rules and lifetime: stacking, auto-dismiss, dismissal
   transitions, observable independently of any operation), and the docs
   state that units are conceptual — a library can hold one. Likewise, the
   feature reducer holding no error state is defensible: the error here is a
   transient notification whose lifetime is owned by the notification entity,
   not persistent feature state other units react to.

   What remains is a boundary cost, not a finding: sonner's entity contract
   accepts only display-ready strings, so the projection step (failure code
   -> user-facing copy) must run before the write — hence the message
   catalogs in controllers. The failure code is flattened into copy at
   dispatch time and is unavailable as observable state afterwards. This
   matters only if a later need appears for i18n, failure telemetry, or
   another unit reacting to operation failures; at that point, a thin
   notification interface accepting typed events (composing copy internally)
   would restore the separation. Not warranted at the current size.

3. Client-side DIP is nominal. (ADDRESSED 2026-07-26)

   Original finding: gateway.types.ts declared the contracts, but controllers
   imported the concrete server actions directly — the interface existed as a
   type with no unit consuming it, so testing a controller required mocking
   individual action modules.

   Resolution: each feature slice now has an explicit Gateway unit. The
   Gateway<I> in gateway.types.ts aggregates all available actions of the
   slice (HomePageGateway, SignUpPageGateway), and gateway.ts implements it
   with a make...Gateway() factory returning the gateway object bound to the
   server actions. Controllers and the client-side use case call the factory
   directly and depend only on the contract; gateway.ts is the single
   client-side module that knows the concrete actions. The factory module is
   the substitution seam: unit tests mock gateway.ts once instead of the
   per-action modules. Verified: full static suite, 198 unit tests, and 60
   in-file e2e tests pass.


STRUCTURAL TRADE-OFFS WORTH ACKNOWLEDGING
-----------------------------------------

- The ceremony is real, and the repo only shows the end state. Roughly nine
  files per operation across drivers, with many pass-through controllers
  (bulkUpdateBffController only repackages arguments). The methodology's own
  answer — start inlined, decompose through continuous refactoring — is
  invisible here because every feature arrives fully decomposed. Defensible
  for a reference implementation, but it undercuts the methodology's
  pragmatism; a "when is the contract/controller/presenter triple worth it"
  note would help adopters.

- The RSC template path is outside the documented model. Server-rendered
  todos flow around the client entities as props, and revalidatePath forms a
  feedback loop (gateway -> server -> template re-render) that appears in no
  diagram. It is a good pragmatic design — client entities hold only
  interaction state — but it is an invention this implementation added, and
  the presenter consequently depends on entities plus template data. The
  methodology docs should own it.

- The scaling claims are untested by this example. The extended units
  (Selector, Transaction, Effect) never appear — the app is too small to need
  them — and RepositoryE2EDriver was dead code until the comparison bug was
  fixed, which signals that path never had a consumer.

- Housekeeping: the failure-code taxonomy is re-declared in three places per
  operation, which is a drift risk. (The related note that UnauthorizedError
  was masked as unexpected_error is resolved for bulk-update - it now reaches
  the presenter, where the API adapter maps it to 403 and the BFF adapter
  still folds it into unexpected_error, which is a deliberate client-facing
  choice rather than an accident.)

- Still open, deliberately parked: updateTodo declares Promise<Todo> but on a
  missing id SQLite returns undefined while in-file returns a malformed
  {completed: true} - a fragment of the input with no id, typed as a Todo.
  Callers trust the declared type (toggleTodoUseCase passes the result
  straight to its presenter), so either value can reach the presenter as if it
  were a real todo. Narrow in practice: every use case checks existence via
  getTodo first, so it needs a race to trigger. The fix is to throw
  DatabaseOperationError as createTodo does, keeping the return type honest.
